---
layout: post
title: "U.S. Intervention in Iraq, and the Historical Transformation of Warmaking"
date: 2019-03-20
---
Last night was the 16-year anniversary of the American-led intervention in <a href="https://theintercept.com/2018/04/09/video-a-brief-history-of-u-s-intervention-in-iraq-over-the-past-half-century/">Iraq</a>. As we contemplate the enduring consequences of this intervention for human rights and political stability in Iraq, it's also useful to think about how this intervention fits into the broader context of state warmaking. In our recent piece published in <a href="https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0095327X19832615"><i>Armed Forces and Society</i></a>, Chad Smith and I consider the environmental consequences of this "new war" - and the variations in the warmaking for developed and lesser developed countries:<br><br>
&nbsp;&nbsp; "Warmaking and war preparation have changed significantly in the 21st century. A number of scholars have documented and &nbsp;&nbsp; analyzed these changes. Drawing on work focused upon “new war” and “new militarism,” we argue that one facet of these &nbsp;&nbsp; practices has received little attention—the environmental consequences of “new militarism.” Specifically, we contend that “asymmetric war” through the mechanism of risk-transfer militarism results in increased carbon emissions. Our analyses utilize fixed effects models for 126 countries using international panel data from 2000 to 2010. We sketch the differences in these outcomes for both developed and developing nations, contextualize carbon emissions within both times of economic prosperity and decline, provide evidence of the differential effects on carbon emissions by a nation’s world-systems standing, and provide empirical evidence of the rise of risk-transfer militarism and its negative effects on the environment."<br>

As we outline in our analysis, risk-tranfer militarism shifts the attendant risks of war - both the latent and manifest consequences - to the peoples and the environments of the Global South. Simultaneously, this trend in warmaking is a significant driver of carbon emissions at the global scale, and it differs significantly for developed and and lesser developed countries; the resource- and technologically-intensive warmaking of the developed countries accelerates carbon emissions. Perhaps more importantly, the environmental consequences of this warmaking drives carbon emissions even in times of global Recession - when the slow-down of the global economy reduce the impact of GDP on carbon emissions. This research further supports the evidence that warmaking has qualitatively unique impacts on the environment which cannot be reduced to capitalism - although the potential for synergy is apparent.

